# Spoofax 2.5.10 (07-07-2020)

Spoofax 2.5.10 contains several smaller improvements.

## Changes

### Overall

-   Update Apache VFS2 to 2.6.0

-   Support for TypeSmart was removed. We anticipate a more useable type
    analysis for Stratego in the form of a gradual type system.

    The `metaborg.yaml` file of a generated project used to contain a
    `debug: typesmart: false`. This was to turn off the TypeSmart
    dynamic analysis by default. This analysis would stop any Stratego
    code when it tried to construct a tree that did not conform to the
    grammar of the project.

    To our knowledge TypeSmart was not used in any active Spoofax
    project. It did, however, slow down the build time of all Spoofax
    projects, because extraction of the grammar into a TypeSmart
    readable format had to be done even if the analysis was off for that
    project. These two points, and the anticipation of a gradual type
    system for Stratego, were the reasons to drop TypeSmart support.

### SDF3

Lexical and context-free sort declarations: In SDF3 you can now
explicitly declare your sorts. Declare lexical sorts in a
`lexical sorts` block, and context-free sorts in a `context-free sorts`
block. Sorts declared in a kernel `sorts` block default to declaring
context-free sorts until a suffix such as `-LEX` is added. Note that you
have to use `sdf2table: java` to support lexical sorts.

### Statix

-   New project that use Statix automatically have the Statix signature
    generator enabled. For this to work properly, declare your lexical
    and context-free sorts in SDF3 explicitly. See the
    `Statix signature generator <statix-signature-generator>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"} documentation for more information.
-   Statix specifications are now compiled as much as possible, even if
    there are errors in some files. Errors in Statix files that are not
    actually imported, do not cause analysis to fail on an empty
    specification anymore.
-   The AST property [type]{.title-ref} is now a built-in, which is
    automatically used in the default editor hover strategy.

### Stratego

Combined compiled Stratego and helper code Compilation of Stratego and
helper code written in Java (in `src/main/strategies`) is now combined
in a single jar file per Spoofax language instead of two. See the
migration guide for more information on what to change in your Spoofax
project.

### SPT

SPT gains support for the `parse ambiguous` expectation, which succeeds
when a fragment parses successfully but with ambiguities. Tests with the
`parse succeeds` expectation will now fail when the input parses
ambiguously. To write tests for ambiguous parses, use the
`parse ambiguous` expectation instead.

{% from 'downloads.md' import downloads with context %}
{{ downloads('2.5.10') }}
