# Spoofax 2.5.12 (08-10-2020)

Spoofax 2.5.12 contains an experimental gradual type system for
Stratego, performance improvements to NaBL2 and Statix, and updates to
Eclipse installations and their embedded JREs.

## Changes

### Stratego

Stratego has two new reserved words: `cast` and `is`. Local variables
can be reserved words if they start with `'`, so you can use `'cast` and
`'is`.

Under the Stratego language options in your `metaborg.yaml` file you can
turn on the gradual type system, if you use the incremental compiler.
This option is `gradual: static`, and only tests the types statically.
The default is `gradual: none` right now, meaning the gradual type
system is not on by default. The `is` dynamic type check is not yet
supported at runtime, you may get Java compilation errors when
attempting to compile Stratego code with that. Dynamic type casts
inserted by the gradual type system are also forthcoming, runtime
support for this is not yet ready.

### NaBL2

-   NaBL2 supports a new resolution algorithm based on fexid-point
    environment computation instead of graph search, which can be
    enabled by adding `strategy environments` to the `name-resolution`
    signature section. It has much better performance characteristics,
    especially when dealing with mutually importing scopes and
    transitive imports. Compared the the search-based, the
    environment-based algorithm can get stuck on scope graphs with
    cycles involving scopes importing references that can be resolved
    via that same scope. Note that the environment-based algorithm may
    increase memory usage. The default remains the search-based
    algorithm.
-   If a file was already analyzed in the editor, it is not reanalyzed
    on save anoymore.

### Statix

-   Analysis times of large, multi-file Statix specifications has
    improved significantly.
-   If a file was already analyzed in the editor, it is not reanalyzed
    on save anoymore.

### Eclipse

-   Premade Eclipse installations have been updated from Eclipse Photon
    to Eclipse 2020-6.
-   Premade Eclipse installations for 32-bit Linux are no longer
    created.
-   Embedded JRE in premade Eclipse installations has been updated from
    8u162 (Oracle JRE) to 8u265-b01 (AdoptOpenJDK).

{% from 'downloads.md' import downloads with context %}
{{ downloads('2.5.12') }}
