# Spoofax 2.5.8 (28-04-2020)

Spoofax 2.5.8 includes several bugfixes and improvements.

## Changes

### SDF

-   The Java version of sdf2table is now slightly faster and takes up
    less peak memory due to improvements in writing away the parsetable
    to file.
-   The old (Aster based) version of make-permissive (to add error
    recovery to your grammar) used to be called in a way that create a
    small memory leak, which would compound over time with subsequent
    builds. This is has now been fixed. The old version of
    make-permissive is only in effect if you use `sdf2table: c` in your
    `metaborg.yaml` file.

### Parser

-   Add two experimental variants to the JSGLR2 parser: `recovery` and
    `recovery-incremental`.
-   Add Unicode support to the JSGLR1 and JSGLR2 parsers. The
    meta-languages themselves do not support Unicode yet, because they
    are bootstrapped with and old version of SDF3. However, other
    languages built with Spoofax can use Unicode.
-   Add logging to the JSGLR2 parser. Configure by setting
    `language.sdf.jsglr2-logging` to `all`, `none`, `minimal`, `parsing`
    or `recovery` in `metaborg.yaml`.

### Programmatic API

-   `TermFactory` for building Stratego terms now supports a builder for
    lists that creates an arraylist-like structure instead of the
    standard linkedlist-like structure. This is typically more efficient
    for building stratego list terms in Java.
-   Add `org.spoofax.terms.util.TermUtils` class with functions for
    working with terms. This replaces the equivalent (now deprecated)
    functions in `org.spoofax.interpreter.core.Tools`.

### NaBL2

-   Improve error message location when scopes are used as term indices.
-   Dropped support for polymorphism, which was unsound.
-   Small improvements to solver performance.
-   Add support for external calls for language with Stratego JAR
    compilation.

### Statix

-   `Ability to automatically generate <statix-signature-generator>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"} Statix signatures from SDF3 specifications.
-   Add support for importing other modules in Statix specifications.
-   Add support for custom messages, and a `try` construct for warnings
    and notes.
-   Add support for adding multiple values to AST properties.
-   Improve disunification support in the solver.
-   Extend reserved keywords to fix parsing problems.
-   Several smaller bugfixes.

### Overall

-   Fixed several issues with files not being released properly, causing
    file I/O errors on Windows.

{% from 'downloads.md' import downloads with context %}
{{ downloads('2.5.8') }}
