# Spoofax 2.2.0 (18-04-2017)

Spoofax 2.2 improves on Spoofax 2.1 with a new NaBL2 constraint solver
which is optimised for performance, improved progress reporting and
cancellation in Eclipse, an experimental replacement for `sdf2table`
which fixes several long-standing bugs, improvements to the core API,
and several bug fixes.

See the corresponding
`migration guide <2.2.0-migration-guide>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}
for migrating from Spoofax 2.1 to Spoofax 2.2.

## Changes

### Overall

-   The deprecated libraries and files from Spoofax 2.1.0 have been
    removed. If you have not done so yet, follow the
    `Spoofax 2.1.0 migration guide <2.1.0-migration-guide>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"} to migrate your project to the new Spoofax library.

### Core API

-   Improve: [Spoofax/190 - Extend API for language
    discovery](http://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/190). This
    deprecates several methods in the language discovery API, see the
    `migration guide <2.2.0-migration-guide>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"} on how to migrate your code.
-   Improve: [Spoofax/193 - Stratego warnings in Spoofax language
    projects with NaBL2
    analysis](http://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/193). The excessive
    number of warnings from Stratego compilation are now filtered out.
-   Improve: Parsing and analysis can report progress and be cancelled.
-   Improve: Builds now report progress.
-   Fix: Path and project path that are passed to the editor hover
    strategy are now consistent with paths passed to other strategies.
-   Fix: [Spoofax/187 - Provide simplified builder
    API](http://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/187).
-   Fix: [Spoofax/188 - Java type error in documented language
    processing code](http://yellowgrass.org/issue/Spoofax/188).

### Eclipse

-   Upgrade: Eclipse Neon (4.6) is now required.
-   Improve: Added several switches to the
    `Spoofax (meta)`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} menu for
    disabling analyses and builds, to improve usability in cases where
    these operations are very slow.
-   Improve: Bind new progress reporting and cancellation in core to
    Eclipse progress monitors, enabling reporting of builds and
    cancellation of analysis.
-   Fix: Fix cancellation not being propagated in SubMonitors,
    preventing cancellation from working in many places.

### SDF3

-   Feature: Re-implemented the parse table generator in Java, removing
    the dependency on a platform-specific `sdf2table` binary, and fixing
    several long-standing bugs. This implementation is still being
    tested, it is therefore only enabled after opt-in. To enable the new
    implementation, set the following option in your
    `metaborg.yaml`{.interpreted-text role="file"} file:

``` yaml
language:
  sdf:
    sdf2table: java
```

-   Improve: Moved the `placeholder` and `pretty-print` options in the
    `metaborg.yaml`{.interpreted-text role="file"} file to be under
    `language.sdf`, as in:

``` yaml
language:
  sdf:
    placeholder:
      prefix: "[["
      suffix: "]]"
    pretty-print: LangName
```

### NaBL2

-   Improve: Introduces a new solver implementation with improved
    performance.
-   Improve: Introduces separate signature sections for *constructors*,
    *relations*, and *functions*.
-   Deprecate: The *types* signature, which will be removed in the next
    release.

### SPT

-   Fix: Several origin tracking issues related to section markers.

### DynSem

-   Fix: Analysis crashes on empty **rules** sections
    ([#161](https://github.com/metaborg/dynsem/issues/161))
-   Improve: Support for abrupt termination: automatic expansion and
    propagation of read-write semantic components with default values
-   Improve: Analysis performance improvements

{% from 'downloads.md' import downloads with context %}
{{ downloads('2.2.0') }}
