# Spoofax 2.3.0 (29-09-2017)

Spoofax 2.3 fixes several minor bugs, upgrades to the latest Eclipse and
Java versions, includes improvements to SDF3 and NaBL2, and introduces
experimental parse table generation and parsing features.

## Changes

### Overall

-   Improvement: made NaBL2 the default static semantics language.
-   Improvement: put deprecated markers on NaBL+TS and Stratego as
    static semantics languages, and SDF2 as syntax language.
-   Improvement: allow configuration of source folders in metaborg.yaml.
-   Improvement: allow multiple languages in source and export entries.
-   Improvement: add dynsem as a compile dependency to newly generated
    languages.

### Language specification build

-   Fix: occasional NPEs when the build failed.
-   Fix: hidden dependency error when building Stratego concrete syntax
    extensions.

### Eclipse plugin

-   Improvement: updated Eclipse instance generator to generate Eclipse
    Oxygen instances.
-   Improvement: updated Eclipse instance generator to include JDK
    8u144b01.
-   Improvement: do not reanalyze already analyzed files when opening an
    editor.
-   Improvement: use a default configuration if metaborg.yaml is not
    present.

### NaBL2

-   Improvement: extended Stratego API to query reference resolution.
-   Improvement: add ? and + operators to regexp syntax for path
    well-formedness.
-   Fix: regexp normalization was only one level deep.
-   Fix: non-termination in name resolution in the cases of a direct
    cycle between a scope.
-   Update: conform to latest DynSem version.
-   Fix: support all Stratego constructor and sort names, by allowing
    dashes and single quotes in sort and constructor names.
-   Fix: do not crash if dynsem properties file is missing.

### SDF3

-   Improvement: more stable SDF3 parser generator.
-   Improvement: new parenthesizer that considers deep priority
    conflicts.
-   Improvement: (experimental) support for lazy parse table generation,
    where the parse table is generated on-the-fly by the parser.
-   Fix: bug in the SDF3 normalizer for groups of priorities outside of
    a chain.
-   Fix: added support for generating the parse table from a
    \"permissive\" grammar
-   Fix: not necessary to specify the parse table as `sdf-new.tbl` in
    the ESV file when using the new parse table generator.

### Parser

-   Added the new (experimental) SGLR parser implementation JSGLR2.

{% from 'downloads.md' import downloads with context %}
{{ downloads('2.3.0') }}
