# Spoofax 2.5.15 (11-05-2021)

Spoofax 2.5.15 contains a couple of small improvements and bug fixes,
and supports the old SDF2-based parse table generator on macOS Catalina
(10.15) and above.

See the corresponding [migration guide](../migrate/2.5.15.md) for
migrating from Spoofax 2.5.14 to Spoofax 2.5.15.

## Changes

### macOS

-   On macOS, Spoofax temporarily requires
    [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/install/) and
    `coreutils` when building Spoofax on macOS Catalina, Big Sur, or
    newer. (This is only when you build Spoofax yourself instead of
    downloading it for this website, it does not influence building
    Spoofax projects.)

### SDF3

-   Fixed tree indexes in layout constraints/declarations to make them
    0-based.
-   The generate namespaced grammar option will now generate the
    namespaced grammar in `src-gen`. This feature can also be set to
    generate the grammar automatically similar to other extractions of
    the grammar like Stratego signatures. See the
    [documentation](../../references/syntax/configuration.md)
    for more information. Sadly, due to a bug in the changes for
    automatic generation, a build in Eclipse of a language project with
    namespaced grammar will work, but the build of that project with
    Maven will not work.

### Statix

-   Fixed origin tracking in Statix injection explication for new
    projects that caused the top-level term of an AST to be missing when
    a Stratego strategy is applied to an analyzed AST in an SPT test.
-   Add a menu action to view the scope graph resulting from Statix
    analysis.
-   Deprecate namespaces, occurrences and query sugar.
-   Fix bug in evaluation of `try` construct.
-   Improvements to memory usage and runtime of the solver.
-   Improve rule overlap handling: consider variables already bound to
    the left more specific than concrete patterns, to keep with
    left-to-right specificity.
-   Add configuration settings to control trace length and term depth in
    error messages.

### Stratego

-   The previously advertised incremental compiler was considered too
    slow and attempts to make it faster made it less stable. It is
    currently not recommended for general use, while we develop a new
    version. The documentation on how to use contains a similar warning
    now.

## Downloads

### Eclipse plugin

#### Premade Eclipse installations

With embedded JRE:

* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.jvm.link.macos_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.jvm.link.linux_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.jvm.link.windows_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.jvm.link.windows_32 }}

Without embedded JRE:

* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.link.macos_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.link.linux_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.link.windows_64 }}
* {{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.install.link.windows_32 }}

#### Update site

* Eclipse update site: `{{ release.v2_5_15.eclipse.repository }}`
* {{release.v2_5_15.eclipse.repository_archive_link}}

### IntelliJ plugin

* IntelliJ update site: `{{ release.v2_5_15.intellij.update_site }}`
* {{release.v2_5_15.intellij.update_site_link}}

### Command-line utilities

* {{release.v2_5_15.sunshine_jar_link}}
* {{release.v2_5_15.spt_testrunner_jar_link}}

### Core API

* {{release.v2_5_15.spoofax_core_uber_jar_link}}
* Spoofax Core uber Maven artifact: `{{release.v2_5_15.spoofax_core_uber_jar_artifact}}`

### StrategoXT

* {{release.v2_5_15.strategoxt_distrib_link}}
* {{release.v2_5_15.strategoxt_jar_link}}

### Maven artifacts

Maven artifacts can be found on our {{artifacts_releases_link}}.
The Maven version used for this release is `2.5.16`.
